___________________________________________________________________
Exercise Session 1 : The Basics
___________________________________________________________________


In this exercise session you will : 

#. Create your own github repository
#. Fork the repository of a friend
#. Navigate the shell
#. Manipulate strings, files, and integers
#. Write your own bona fide python program

-------------------------------------------------------------------
Create Your Own Github Repository
-------------------------------------------------------------------

It's so easy. Name it ExcerciseSession .

Just [[login | http://github.com/login/]] and follow [[the instructions. 
| http://help.github.com/create-a-repo/]] 

-------------------------------------------------------------------
Add a File the Repository
-------------------------------------------------------------------

Start with a **.py** file that will contain your solution program. 

You may want to start by defining a **main()** function.

-------------------------------------------------------------------
Build a Python Program
-------------------------------------------------------------------

The text files you reorganized in the shell session should be in a single 
directory and should all have the extension **.txt**. 

#. Create a function that finds all of the filenames and puts them in a list.
   ( hint: import os, glob ). 

#. Create a function that, given a line from a file, returns true if that line 
   contains a question with an N response and false otherwise.

#. Create a function that, given the filename and the line that has a missing response, fixes the 
   missing entry by appending that line with a default answer of gender M.

#. Use these functions together (probably within the main function) to create a loop that, 
   for each file in the file list, reads each line, determines whether it is 
   missing a response, and if it is, fixes the missing entry in place within the 
   files.

Be sure to commit your changes often and occasionally push your commits to your 
repository, especially when your solution is complete. 

I'll share my solution at the end of the session.


-------------------------------------------------------------------
Fork the Repository of a Friend
-------------------------------------------------------------------

Fork their repository, check their solution, and improve something. 

Push your improvement to your fork of their repository.
