............................................
Python 5: Strings and File I/O
............................................

Lesson goals:

1) Examine the string class in greater detail.

2) Use open() to open, read, and write to files.

--------------------------------------------
Strings
--------------------------------------------

To start understanding the String class, let's use the built in help system.

::

  > help(str)
 Help on class str in module __builtin__:

 class str(basestring)
  |  str(object) -> string
  |  
  |  Return a nice string representation of the object.
  |  If the argument is a string, the return value is the same object.
  |  
  |  Method resolution order:
  |      str
  |      basestring
  |      object
  |  
  |  Methods defined here:
  |  
  |  __add__(...)
  |      x.__add__(y) <==> x+y
  |  
  |  __contains__(...)
  |      x.__contains__(y) <==> y in x
  |  
  |  __eq__(...)
  |      x.__eq__(y) <==> x==y
  |  
  |  __format__(...)
  |      S.__format__(format_spec) -> unicode
  |  
  |   __ge__(...)
  |      x.__ge__(y) <==> x>=y
  |  
  |  __getattribute__(...)
  |      x.__getattribute__('name') <==> x.name
  |  
  |  __getitem__(...)
  |      x.__getitem__(y) <==> x[y]
  |  
  |  __getnewargs__(...)
  |  
  |  __getslice__(...)
  |      x.__getslice__(i, j) <==> x[i:j]
  |      
  |      Use of negative indices is not supported.
  |  
  ...

The help page for string is very long, and it may be easier to keep it open in a browser window by going to the [[online Python documentation|http://docs.python.org/library/stdtypes.html#sequence-types-str-unicode-list-tuple-bytearray-buffer-xrange]] while we talk about its properties.

At its heart, a string is just a sequence of characters. Basic strings are defined using single or double quotes.

::

 > s = "This is a string."
 > s2 = 'This is another string that uses single quotes'

The reason for having two types of quotes to define a string is emphasized in these examples:

::

 > s = "Bob's mom called to say hello."
 > s = 'Bob's mom called to say hello.'

The second one should be an error: Python interprets it as s = 'Bob' then the rest of the line breaks the language standard.

Characters in literal strings must come from the ASCII character set, which is a set of 127 character codes that is used by all modern programming languages and computers. Unfortunately, ASCII does not have room for non-Roman characters like accents or Eastern scripts. Unicode strings in Python are specified with a leading u:

::

 > u = u'abcdé'

For the rest of this lecture, we will deal with ASCII strings, because most scientific data that is stored as text is stored with ASCII. 

-----------------------------------------
Working with Strings
-----------------------------------------

Strings are iterables, which means many of the ideas from lists can also be applied directly to string manipulation. For instance, characters can be accessed individually or in sequences:

::

  > s = 'abcdefghijklmnopqrstuvwxyz'
  > s[0]
  'a'
  > s[-1]
  'z'
  > s[1:4]
  'bcd'

They can also be compared using sort and equals.

::

  > 'str1' == 'str2'
  False
  > 'str1' == 'str1'
  True
  > 'str1' < 'str2'
  True

In the help screen, which we looked at above, there are lots of functions that look like this:

::

  |  __add__(...)
  |      x.__add__(y) <==> x+y

  |  __le__(...)
  |      x.__le__(y) <==> x<y

These are special Python functions that interpret operations like < and + . We'll talk more about these in the next lecture on Classes.

Some special functions introduce handy text functions. 
